in the last video we saw how subclasses
can take advantage of all the attributes
data attributes and methods of their
superclass and we also added extra
functionality to our subclasses to give
them extra attributes that their base
class didn't have in this video we're
going to see how to change the behavior
further so that a subclass can implement
a method from its superclass and
actually do things differently now vampire
are shifty creatures they don't get to
live for all eternity without learning a
few tricks after all so what we're going
to do is change the take damage method
so that vampires can dodge when attacked
can turn into a bat or move super fast
or whatever trick they learnt
to avoid getting bashed so going to
choose a random element so that our
vampire has a one-in-three chance of
dodging a blow
now we've used the random module before
and we're going to use it again here to
generate a random number between one on
the three inclusive and if we get a
three vampires successfully dodges the blow
let's open up the vampire class which is
if you recall is in our enemy.py
script we're going to come down here and
start to make some changes so we're
going to do is start and create the
dodges method so....
....
...
...so we now
got a method which is quite simple
and if the number generated is three
we're going to print a message that the
vampire Dodges and return true
otherwise it returns false now one
thing you might be wondering is looking
at code is why i imported the random
method on line 43 into this method rather
than putting it at the top of the module
and to be honest I'm actually wondering
that myself and seriously though what i
have done is show you that it can be
done there so you may see it in code
that you have to maintain and in rare
cases it may even make sense to do it
like this
now with that said that most of the time
I suggest you don't do it like this i'm
going to take my own advice and remove the
import to the start of the module we're
it belongs ok write at to the top there
ok so we now defined the Dodges
method for the vampire added an extra
few lines their just for clarity with
subtitles but i'll remove that too at
some point
alright so that's better at this point
we now no longer import the random module
every time the Dodge method is called and
if we need to use random numbers in
another enemy class object it's now
available to all the adventure games are
traditionally played with dice so we
will most certainly want to include
random behavior elsewhere and even if we knew
we only ever use the random module
the Dodge method it's still not a good
idea to perform the import their
alright so now we're going to change the
behavior of our vampires when their
attacked but before we do that let's
swing back over to the main python script
and test our dodged method so
we're going to put some code down here
so before line 28
we're going to put....
....
...
so lets just run this to see that it does work
we can see if we scroll up that vlads
doggers I think it should fix that
dodges that is better try that
again and we should see now that vlad our
vampires should randomly dodge
dodge there and it's a
one-in-three chance just run it one more time
theirs another dodge so we can say
that we are getting different results it is
random and we can see that vlad our
vampire is dodging some of the attacks
so it does seem to be working we saw
that the last time I run it there
the Dodges came up less i think there's
any actually one dodge there for the
whole run and you will find situations
because it's random where that vlad
won't dodge at all and it's also possible
for him to dodge every blow and never die
but it's actually not very likely
alright so we've added a new method to
the vampire class to give them the
ability to dodge what we really want is
for that behavior to be built into the
class rather than our main program
having to check that during each attack
so to do that we're going to override
the take
_damage method that the vampire
class inherits from enemy now don't
confuse overriding a method with
overloading it as i mentioned earlier
overloading doesn't exist in python so
if you're not sure what it is then don't
worry because you can't actually do it
anyway but overriding a method that
means replacing it with another one now
in languages such as Java and C++ there
are restrictions on the definition of an
overriding method in Python you just write
a new method with the same name as the
one that you want to override the new
method doesn't even have to have the
same or accept the same number of
parameters although it usually will so
lets override the enemy
classes take damage method to make
it do something different in the vampire
class going to come up and work on our
vampire class and what we're going to do
is come down here and add another
method we're going to type...
...
....
...let's just run it like I have
defined it on line 52 and see what
happens when I run it and see we
can get
or we are getting into an infinite loop so
i want to stop the program so let's
actually go back and look at what
happened now in our main py script we
keep on looping as long as the vamp is
alive on line 27 that method the method
that can result in an enemy no longer
being alive is the take_damage
method in the enemy class so when our
vampire object use that method which
they inherit from enemy the program
works but now that we've given the
vampire class its own take_
damage method that's the method being
called up here on line 29 the new method
that we defined for the vampire now
because the vampire version of the
method doesn't do anything yet
therefore our vampire never dies now
that may be a feature of vampires but
it's going to make for a very boring
game but it does show now that we
are calling the vampire class take_damage
method rather than the enemy
one it really does confirm that that method
is being executed and not the original
take_damage method from the
superclass which in this case
was the enemy class that's why i ran it
at this stage just to make that clear
but what we want to do here is call the super
version of take damage but change things
slightly so that our vampires can still
dodge now we've already seen how to call
a super method from a subclass when we
created the init method for the troll
and vampire classes so now we can do the
same thing for take_damage
we only want to take damage if the
vampire doesn't dodge so let's write the
code for that so going back to our enemy
class to our vampire class whether i'm
going to get rid of this pass instead what
we're going to put in here is....
....
...
...so we are using super just like we did
when we call these superclasses init
method you can see that on line 43 only
this time we are calling the take_
damage method now by calling take_
damage like this we don't to write all
the code again we just wrap the call
to the super method in a test to see
whether the vampire dodges or should
take damage the other advantage is now
we don't need to put the testing in our
main program let's put that back so we
can take out this if not vamped
Dodges now back to what it was and i
just comment that out of print for now
if we run this we should see that it
works vlad is down eventually
and his got heaps dodging you can see these
are quire a few Dodges this time this
particular occasion is taking damage as
well and then he is dead and he's now dead on
the last line and again because of the
random element the number of Dodges each
time will vary greatly but over time it
should be roughly one-third of each
attack that results in a successful
dodge now note that vlad sometimes starts off
with all 12 hit points because you
sometimes dodge the attack when we
attempt to take five points of damage
here on line 20 so in other words the
ability to dodge is now part of the
vampire subclass and although
vampires inherit from enemy they
now behave differently when attacked
so you've now seen two of the really
important benefits of using inheritance
when creating classes first our sub
classes get all the attributes that's
the data and methods that are defined in
their base class also known as a
superclass so that we don't have to
write the same code again and again for
each sub class
but second we can also extend or alter
the behavior of a class by creating a
subclass that adds extra methods or
changes the behavior of an existing
method we're going to see an example of
that in the next section when we
subclass the TK inter ist box so that
it populates itself with data from a
database now there's one other thing we
might want to do with our classes and
in fact if we were going to do this then
we should have done from the start
however i left the two now because if
you do then you might have a problem
with IntelliJ is renaming of variables
so to see what the potential problem is
we look at the code here what i'm going to do
is I'm just going to comment out these
first two lines and i'm going to put
another line of code in here....
...
....you can see here that I've
added some code that modified vlad lives
and hit points attributes directly if
you run this and surprisingly vlads ends
up with no lives left and hit points
set to only one that's normal behavior
for python and as we've seen a few times
we can't prevent code from accessing the
data attributes of our classes what we
can do is providing indication
that this shouldn't be done and if you
remember the convention is to prefix the
attribute names with an underscore now
ideally we would have done this right from
the start and in fact of i'd recommend
prefixing your class data attributes with
an underscore right away if you decide you
want that to you want to hide them and
if you do find that you need to access
them directly you can refactor the ones
that do require direct access or at a
property for them as we saw in a
previous video in this section of the
course so the decision on whether to
hide the attributes or not isn't
necessarily a simple one and there
really are no hard and fast rules that
apply to all scenarios
now keep in mind that the python
philosophy is that you probably
shouldn't hide them
unless modifying them directly will break your
code somehow so modifying the lives
and hit points as we're doing here
on line 31 and 32 won't break the code
so i'd be tempted to leave them as they
were but as I want to show you a
potential pitfall with renaming
attributes in IntelliJ we'll go ahead
and mark them as private for one of a
better term when I use the term private
in Python remember i'm talking about
intention and things aren't really private
alright so we can just go ahead and
refactor our attributes in the enemy
class go back to enemy going up here
because it's the enemy class that we
wanted do our reflecting on going to
start here with a self.name so
going to right click on name refactor
rename just going to add an underscore
to the name press enter so changes
reflected and going to the same for
hitpoints lives and the life
so each one i'm just going to rename just
putting _ at the start
alright so that's all 4 now you can
see here as an example self dot
underscore hit_points equals
remaining points as an example of what
intelliJ has done when it's refactored
and renamed things for us so switching
back to main we can see here that the
attributes have been renamed as well so
intelliJ done that when we use
the refactor but eventually run this we
actually get an error troll object has
no attribute name so intelliJ
normally does a great job but it does
fall down on those replacement fields
that we've used before in the enemy
class in our underscore underscore
string method this method here and
going back to the error
luckily it's actually telling us its
line 27 in the underscore underscore
string underscore underscore method so
we have a look at that again that is
this line here so you can see what the
problem is that intelliJ hasn't
actually rename those replacement fields
correctly now we could just edit up those
occurrences manually but we've also got
to change lines in some other places as
well like for example on line 21 and
line 23 they are both referring to the old
name before it was prefixed with an _
so it's really a bit of work to
do here and going down looking at the
troll we've actually got will
need to do some working there as well the
troll grunt method hasn't an _
for the data attributes anymore either
so quite a bit of work to actually go
right through and refactor this if we
wanted to do it so it's quite a lot of
work and as I mentioning to do this and
I want to draw your attention to a
possible pitfall with refactoring data
attributes but i'm going to show you a
quick way to do with that next important
thing here is that you can get problems
if you use this form of replacement
fields and then try to refactor the
attributes later alright so i'm going to
end the video here now in the next video
will continue on and we're actually
going to bring some regular expressions
to try and fix this issue so see you in
the next video